PROTOCOL
The Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Italian Republic, desiring to conclude a
Protocol clarifying and supplementing the Convention for the
Avoidance of Double Taxation with Respect to Taxes on Income and
the Prevention of Fraud or Fiscal Evasion (hereinafter referred
to as "the Convention") to be signed simultaneously with the
signing of this Protocol, have agreed upon the following
provisions, which shall be an integral part of the Convention.
ARTICLE 1
1. For purposes of paragraph 2(b) of Article 1 (Personal
Scope) of the Convention, the term "citizen" as applied to the
United States shall include a former citizen or long-term
resident whose loss of such status had as one of its principal
purposes the avoidance of tax, but only for a period of 10 years
following such loss.
2. The provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 1 (Personal
Scope) of the Convention shall not affect:
(a) the benefits conferred by a Contracting State
under paragraph 2 of Article 18 (Pensions, Etc.) of the
Convention to residents of the other Contracting State who
are nationals of that other State, even if they are also
nationals of the first-mentioned State;
(b) the benefits conferred by a Contracting State
under Article 4 of this Protocol.
3. For purposes of paragraph 2(a) of Article 2 (Taxes
Covered) of the Convention, the Convention shall apply to the
excise tax imposed by the United States on insurance premiums
paid to foreign insurers only to the extent that the foreign
insurer does not reinsure such risks with a person not entitled
to exemption from such tax under this or any other Convention.

4. For purposes of paragraph 1(i) of Article 3 (General
Definitions) of the Convention, the term "qualified governmental
entity" includes:
(a) in the case of the United States:
(i) the Federal Reserve Banks;
(ii) the Export-Import Bank; and
(iii) the Overseas Private Investment
Corporation;
(b) in the case of Italy:
(i) La Banca d’Italia (the Central Bank);
(ii) L’Istituto per il Commercio con l’Estero
(the Foreign Trade Institute); and
(iii) L’Istituto per l’Assicurazione del Credito
all’Esportazione (the Official Insurance Institute for
Export Credits);
and such financial institutions, the capital of which is wholly
owned by a Contracting State or any state or political or
administrative subdivision or local authority as may be agreed
from time to time between the competent authorities of both of
the Contracting States.
5. For purposes of paragraph 1 of Article 4 (Resident) of
the Convention:
(a) A legal person organized under the laws of a
Contracting State and that is generally exempt from tax in
that State and is established and maintained in that State
either:
(i) exclusively for a religious, charitable,
educational, scientific, or other similar purpose; or
(ii) to provide pensions or other similar
benefits to employees pursuant to a plan
is to be treated as a resident of that Contracting State;

(b) A qualified governmental entity is to be treated
as a resident of the Contracting State where it is
established;
(c) Italy shall treat a United States citizen or an
alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence (a "green
card" holder) as a resident of the United States only if
such person has a substantial presence, permanent home, or
habitual abode in the United States; and
(d) The provisions of subparagraph 1(b) of Article 4
(Resident) of the Convention shall apply to determine the
residence of an entity that is treated as fiscally
transparent under the laws of either Contracting State.
6. For purposes of paragraph 2 of Article 5 (Permanent
Establishment) of the Convention, a drilling rig or ship used
for the exploration or development of natural resources
constitutes a permanent establishment in a Contracting State
only if it remains in that State for more than twelve months.
7. For purposes of paragraph 1 of Article 8 (Shipping and
Air Transport) of the Convention, profits from the operation in
international traffic of ships or aircraft include:
(a) profits from the use, maintenance, or rental of
containers (including trailers, barges, and related
equipment for the transport of containers) used for the
transport in international traffic of goods or merchandise;
and
(b) profits derived from the rental on a full basis of
ships or aircraft and profits derived from the rental on a
bareboat basis of ships or aircraft, provided in the latter
case that such rental profits are incidental to other
profits from the operation of ships or aircraft in
international traffic.
8. For purposes of Article 8 (Shipping and Air Transport)
of the Convention, and notwithstanding any other provision of
the Convention, profits which a national of the United States
not resident in Italy or a United States corporation derives
from operating ships documented or aircraft registered under the
laws of the United States shall be exempt from tax in Italy.

9. The provisions of Article 9 (Associated Enterprises) of
the Convention shall not limit any provisions of the law of
either Contracting State which permit the distribution,
apportionment, or allocation of income, deductions, credits, or
allowances between persons owned or controlled directly or
indirectly by the same interests when necessary in order to
prevent evasion of taxes or clearly to reflect the income of any
such persons.
10. For purposes of paragraph 4 of Article 10 (Dividends),
paragraph 5 of Article 11 (Interest), paragraph 5 of Article 12
(Royalties), and paragraph 2 of Article 22 (Other Income) of the
Convention, it is agreed that the last sentence included therein
cannot be interpreted so that the principles included in
Articles 7 (Business Profits) and 14 (Independent Personal
Services) of the Convention are not taken into consideration.
11. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1, 2, and
3 of Article 11 (Interest) of the Convention, interest that is
an excess inclusion with respect to a real estate mortgage
investment conduit may be taxed by each State in accordance with
its own domestic law.
12. For purposes of paragraph 1 of Article 13 (Capital
Gains) of the Convention:
(a) the term "immovable property" in the case of the
United States, includes a United States real property
interest; and
(b) the term "immovable property" in the case of Italy
includes:
(i) immovable property referred to in Article 6
(Income from Immovable Property);
(ii) shares or comparable interests in a company
or other body of persons, the assets of which consist
wholly or principally of real property situated in
Italy; and
(iii) an interest in an estate of a deceased
individual, the assets of which consist wholly or
principally of real property situated in Italy.

(c) property described in subparagraph (a) of this
paragraph shall be deemed to be situated in the United
States and property described in subparagraph (b) of this
paragraph shall be deemed to be situated in Italy.
13. For purposes of paragraph 3 of Article 13 (Capital
Gains) of the Convention, gains derived by an enterprise of a
Contracting State from the alienation of ships or aircraft
operated by such enterprise in international traffic include:
(a) gains from the alienation of containers (including
trailers, barges, and related equipment for the transport
of containers) used for the transport in international
traffic of goods or merchandise; and
(b) gains from the alienation of ships or aircraft
rented on a full basis or gains from the alienation of
ships or aircraft rented on a bareboat basis if, in the
latter case, rental profits were incidental to other
profits from the operation of ships or aircraft in
international traffic.
14. Directors' fees and other similar payments derived by a
resident of a Contracting State which are described in Article
16 (Directors' Fees) of the Convention may be taxed in the other
Contracting State only to the extent that the fees and other
payments are attributable to services performed in such other
State.
15. With respect to paragraph 6 of Article 18 (Pensions,
Etc.), the term "pension plan" in the case of Italy shall mean
"fondi pensione."
16. With respect to Article 19 (Government Service) of the
Convention, it is understood that the competent authorities of
the Contracting States may by mutual agreement apply the
provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 19 (Government
Service) to employees of organizations that perform functions of
a governmental nature.
17. With respect to Articles 20 (Professors and Teachers)
and 21 (Students and Trainees) of the Convention, the term
"recognized educational institution" in the case of the United
States shall mean an accredited educational institution. An
educational institution will be considered to be accredited if
it is accredited by an authority that generally is responsible
for accreditation of institutions in the particular field of
study.
18. Nothing in Article 24 (Non-Discrimination) of the
Convention shall be construed as preventing either Contracting
State from imposing a tax as described in paragraph 6 of Article
10 (Dividends) or paragraph 8 of Article 11 (Interest) of the
Convention.
19. With respect to paragraph 3 of Article 25 (Mutual
Agreement Procedure) of the Convention, the competent
authorities of the Contracting States may, in particular, agree
that the conditions for the application of paragraph 10 of
Article 10 (Dividends), paragraph 9 of Article 11 (Interest),
paragraph 8 of Article 12 (Royalties), or paragraph 3 of Article
22 (Other Income) of the Convention are met.
20. For purposes of Article 26 (Exchange of Information) of
the Convention, the Convention shall apply to taxes of every
kind imposed by a Contracting State. It is understood that
information may be disclosed to persons or authorities involved
in the oversight of the activities for which information may be
exchanged under Article 26 (Exchange of Information), and such
persons shall use the information only for such oversight
purposes and shall be subject to the limitations of Article 26
(Exchange of Information).
ARTICLE 2
1. A resident of a Contracting State shall be entitled to
benefits otherwise accorded to residents of a Contracting State
by the Convention only to the extent provided in this Article.
2. A resident of a Contracting State shall be entitled to
all the benefits of the Convention if the resident is:
(a) an individual;
(b) a qualified governmental entity;
(c) a company, if:
(i) all the shares in the class or classes of
shares representing more than 50 percent of the voting
power and value of the company are regularly traded on
a recognized stock exchange, or
(ii) at least 50 percent of each class of shares
in the company is owned directly or indirectly by five
or fewer companies entitled to benefits under clause
(i), provided that in the case of indirect ownership,
each intermediate owner is a person entitled to
benefits of the Convention under this paragraph;
(d) described in subparagraph 5(a)(i) of Article 1 of
this Protocol;
(e) described in subparagraph 5(a)(ii) of Article 1 of
this Protocol, provided that more than 50 percent of the
person's beneficiaries, members or participants are
individuals resident in either Contracting State; or
(f) a person other than an individual, if:
(i) On at least half the days of the taxable year
persons described in subparagraphs (a), (b), (c), (d)
or (e) own, directly or indirectly (through a chain of
ownership in which each person is entitled to benefits
of the Convention under this paragraph), at least 50
percent of each class of shares or other beneficial
interests in the person, and
(ii) less than 50 percent of the person's gross
income for the taxable year is paid or accrued,
directly or indirectly, to persons who are not
residents of either Contracting State (unless the
payment is attributable to a permanent establishment
situated in either State), in the form of payments
that are deductible for income tax purposes in the
person’s State of residence.
3. (a) A resident of a Contracting State not otherwise
entitled to benefits shall be entitled to the benefits of
this Convention with respect to an item of income derived
from the other State, if:
(i) the resident is engaged in the active conduct
of a trade or business in the first-mentioned State,
(ii) the income is connected with or incidental
to the trade or business, and
(iii) the trade or business is substantial in
relation to the activity in the other State generating
the income.
(b) For purposes of this paragraph, the business of
making or managing investments will not be considered an
active trade or business unless the activity is banking,
insurance or securities activity conducted by a bank,
insurance company or registered securities dealer.
(c) Whether a trade or business is substantial for
purposes of this paragraph will be determined based on all
the facts and circumstances. In any case, however, a trade
or business will be deemed substantial if, for the preced-
ing taxable year, or for the average of the three preceding
taxable years, the asset value, the gross income, and the
payroll expense that are related to the trade or business
in the first-mentioned State equal at least 7.5 percent of
the resident's (and any related parties') proportionate
share of the asset value, gross income and payroll expense,
respectively, that are related to the activity that
generated the income in the other State, and the average of
the three ratios exceeds 10 percent.
(d) Income is derived in connection with a trade or
business if the activity in the other State generating the
income is a line of business that forms a part of or is
complementary to the trade or business. Income is
incidental to a trade or business if it facilitates the
conduct of the trade or business in the other State.
4. A resident of a Contracting State not otherwise
entitled to benefits may be granted benefits of the Convention
if the competent authority of the State from which benefits are
claimed so determines.
5. For purposes of this Article the term "recognized stock
exchange" means:
(a) the NASDAQ System owned by the National Associa-
tion of Securities Dealers, Inc. and any stock exchange
registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
as a national securities exchange under the U.S. Securities
Exchange Act of 1934;
(b) any stock exchange constituted and organized
according to Italian laws; and
(c) any other stock exchanges agreed upon by the
competent authorities of both Contracting States.
ARTICLE 3
1. The Convention shall not restrict in any manner any
exclusion, exemption, deduction, credit, or other allowance now
or hereafter accorded:
(a) by the laws of either Contracting State, or
(b) by any other agreement between the Contracting
States.
2. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1(b):
(a) the provisions of Article 25 (Mutual Agreement
Procedure) of the Convention exclusively shall apply to any
dispute concerning whether a measure is within the scope of
the Convention, and the procedures under the Convention
exclusively shall apply to that dispute; and
(b) unless the competent authorities determine that a
taxation measure is not within the scope of this
Convention, the nondiscrimination obligations of this
Convention exclusively shall apply with respect to that
measure, except for such national treatment or most-
favored-nation obligations as may apply to trade in goods
under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. No
national treatment or most-favored-nation obligation under
any other agreement shall apply with respect to that
measure.
(c) For the purpose of this paragraph, a "measure" is
a law, regulation, rule, procedure, decision,
administrative action, or any similar provision or action.
ARTICLE 4
It is agreed that a United States citizen resident in Italy
who is a partner of a partnership that is a national of the
United States shall be entitled to a refundable credit against
that partner's individual income tax (l'imposta sul reddito
delle persone fisiche) imposed by Italy for the taxable period
equal to the portion of the corporation income tax (l'imposta
sul reddito delle persone giuridiche) imposed by Italy for the
same period on the partnership that is attributable to that
partner's share of the partnership income.
ARTICLE 5
Taxes withheld at the source in a Contracting State at the
rates provided by domestic law will be refunded by request of
the taxpayer if the right to collect the said taxes is limited
by the provisions of the Convention. Claims for refund, which
shall be made within the time limit fixed by the law of the
Contracting State which is obliged to make the refund, shall be
accompanied by an official certificate of the Contracting State
of which the taxpayer is a resident certifying the existence of
the conditions required for being entitled to the benefits
provided for by the Convention. This provision shall not be
construed to prevent the competent authority of each Contracting
State from establishing other modes of application of the
benefits provided for by the Convention.
ARTICLE 6
Each of the Contracting States may collect on behalf of the
other Contracting State such amounts as may be necessary to
ensure that relief granted by the Convention from taxation
imposed by such other State does not enure to the benefit of
persons not entitled thereto. The preceding sentence shall not,
however, impose upon either of the Contracting States the
obligation to carry out administrative measures which are of a
different nature from those used in the collection of its own
tax, or which would be contrary to its sovereignty, security, or
public policy.
ARTICLE 7
1. The appropriate authority of either Contracting State
may request consultations with the appropriate authority of the
other Contracting State to determine whether amendment to the
Convention is appropriate to respond to changes in the law or
policy of either Contracting State. If these consultations
determine that the effect of the Convention or its application
have been unilaterally changed by reason of domestic legislation
enacted by a Contracting State such that the balance of benefits
provided by the Convention has been significantly altered, the
authorities shall consult with each other with a view to
amending the Convention to restore an appropriate balance of
benefits.
2. Within three years after the entry into force of the
Convention, the competent authorities shall consult with respect
to the implementation of Article 25 (Mutual Agreement Procedure)
and, taking into account experience with respect thereto,
determine whether any modifications to Article 25 (Mutual
Agreement Procedure) would be appropriate and, also taking into
account experience with respect to arbitration of international
tax disputes, shall determine whether it is appropriate to
exchange the diplomatic notes referred to in paragraph 5 of
Article 25 (Mutual Agreement Procedure), and if so the
provisions thereof.
ARTICLE 8
If any State or locality of the United States imposes tax
on profits of enterprises of Italy from the operation in
international traffic of ships or aircraft, Italy may impose its
regional tax on productive activities (l’imposta regionale sulle
attività produttive) on such profits of enterprises of the
United States, notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph
2(b)(iii) of Article 2 (Taxes Covered) and Article 8 (Shipping
and Air Transport) of the Convention.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized
by their respective Governments, have signed this Protocol.
DONE at Washington, in duplicate, in the English and
Italian languages, the two texts having equal authenticity, this
twenty-fifth day of August, 1999.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
ITALIAN REPUBLIC:
